Brave the Cold?
Well, recently we had a little bit of an issue with a door in our house.
It was the door that enters and exits from our family room to our garage.
And it just wouldn't work quite right.
It wouldn't close the way it should.
And no matter how much I tried to adjust it, something fell off.
I got a picture here.
You can see where the latch is hitting the plate.
Just a little low.
Now, the only reason I can say that confidently is because someone smarter than I am at this stuff told me that was what the problem was.
So, like basically the door would not latch and like if I would open the garage and a cold like air would come in it would just blow right open.
which in addition to letting cold in the house, when you have a one-year-old dog that likes to run everywhere, it's not ideal to keep the dog in the house.
So it was not something we wanted to let go.
So I did what most of us nowadays do.
I got on YouTube.
And I found a few tutorial videos.
I watched as the people confidently explained three easy steps to explain how to fix this very, very common problem.
And I immediately realized I was in over my head.
The terminology they were using was unfamiliar.
I kept pausing the video to look up words.
You know the saying goes, it's Greek to me.
I'm a Bible nerd, so like ancient Greek isn't always Greek to me, but like door stuff is Greek to me.
So, you know, I had to look up stuff and I eventually, I just stopped trying to understand it all together.
And I just started to try to copy what I was seeing them do.
So if they took a screwdriver and a hammer and pounded on the screwdriver to try to move something, I tried to do it.
And then I'd close the door and it wouldn't latch.
I tightened what they tightened.
I adjusted what they adjusted.
I tried to mimic the motions of the video, but it didn't fix the problem.
So I finally called a fix it guy who actually knew what he was doing.
And when the, when the fix the guy showed up, it became obvious pretty quickly that this wasn't his first time dealing with something like this.
He knew exactly which tools to use.
He knew the common issues before he even took the door apart.
And yes, he had to pull the frame off, which was something I never would have done because I would have cracked the frame.
I promise you that.
He diagnosed the problem almost immediately and got to work.
Now here's what struck me the most.
As he worked, I was in the room because I like to try to learn something, even though I wasn't understanding the YouTubers out there.
And as he was working, he was explaining what was wrong, not with technical jargon, not to impress me with his years of experience and knowledge, but in language I could actually understand.
He showed me what I had missed and why my attempts to fix the door didn't work and what needed to change.
And he fixed it.
And guess what?
The door stays shut.
It's really nice.
Merry Christmas.
And I walked away understanding something that I hadn't before.
If we're honest, most of us have moments like I just described.
We work really hard, we try our best, but we still miss what actually helps.
And that experience is sticking with me because it reminded me of something simple but important.
Clarity doesn't just fix problems, it helps people.
Or as Brene Brown likes to say, and as our missions team has in every meeting on the top of our agenda, clarity is kindness.
Good intentions aren't enough.
Effort isn't enough.
Even passion isn't enough.
If you don't understand what's actually happening, you can work hard and still miss the point.
And that's exactly the issue that Paul's addressing in the chapter that we're gonna be reading this morning in 1 Corinthians 14.
Again, he's writing to a church that is passionate, expressive, and very, very spiritually active, but not always helpful.
People are speaking, people are participating, but clarity is missing when the church gathers in Corinth.
And because clarity is missing,
The church isn't being built up the way it should be.
So Paul reframes the whole conversation with one guiding principle.
The spirit works to build others up, not to show ourselves off.
The truth reshapes how spiritual gifts are used, how worship functions, and even how believers interact with people who don't yet.
believe.
So I want us to step into Paul's argument together this morning, beginning where he starts with a reminder that clarity and edification are not optional in the life of the church.
They are expressions of love, which is what he talked about last week when we read 1 Corinthians 13.
And we see clearly in first, we see that the most clearly in 1 Corinthians 14 verse 6, so I want to start
there this morning.
Because Paul isn't correcting a church that lacks passion.
He's correcting a church that lacks direction.
And Paul's goal isn't to quiet the spirit, but to make sure the spirit's work actually reaches people.
The Corinthians loved spiritual experiences.
They loved expressive worship.
They loved exercising their gifts.
But Paul's concern is simple in searching.
Are the things you're doing actually helping anyone?
So before he gives practical instructions, Paul lays down a principle that governs everything that follows.
And he does it by reframing how spiritual gifts are meant to function in the first place.
Paul's argument moves in three movements.
One, clarity builds the church.
Two, clarity serves outsiders, and three, clarity reflects Christ.
So I want us to read this first passage here as he brings the first movement, starting in verse six.
of chapter 14.
So now brothers and sisters, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I benefit you unless I speak to you with a revelation or knowledge or prophecy or teaching?
Even lifeless instruments that produce sounds, whether flute or harp, if they don't make a distinction in the notes, how will what is played on the flute or harp be recognized?
In fact, if the bugle makes an unclear sound, who will prepare for battle?
In the same way, unless you use your tongue for intelligible speech, how will what is spoken be known?
For you will be speaking into the air.
There are doubtless many different kinds of languages in the world.
None is without meaning.
Therefore, if I do not know the meaning of the language, I will be a foreigner to the speaker, and the speaker will be a foreigner to me.
So also you, since you are zealous for spiritual gifts, seek to excel in building up the church.
So in verses six through eight here, Paul begins with a simple question.
If I come to you speaking in tongues, he says, how will I benefit you unless I bring revelation, knowledge, prophecy, or teaching?
His point is not to be anti-tongues.
And as an aside, the word tongues really ought to be translated languages.
The idea of the gift of speaking in tongues in the early church was that languages that were not known to the speaker were gifted them by the Spirit so that they could speak in another language and reach someone that speaks that language.
It wasn't a bunch of gobble to you.
Anyway, that settled.
Paul uses everyday illustrations
using musical instruments, battle trumpets to make one point unmistakable.
Sound without meaning doesn't serve anybody.
Spiritual activity that isn't understandable may feel powerful, but it doesn't accomplish God's purpose.
So Paul is setting a tone in this first part.
If it doesn't help people grow, it misses the point of the gift.
It doesn't help people grow, it misses the point of the gift.
In verses nine through 12, Paul sharpens the argument.
He says, speaking words no one understands is like speaking into the air.
Noise without impact, effort without bearing fruit.
Then comes verse 12, which is one of our anchor verses today.
Since you are eager for manifestations of the spirit, strive to excel in building up the church.
Paul doesn't rebuke their eagerness, he redirects it.
Spiritual maturity is not measured by how much you experience
but by how much others are strengthened because of you and the gift you display.
This is the first major framing.
The spirit works to build up, not to show off.
But Paul knows clarity isn't just about the room.
It's also about the person using the gift.
And so he goes on in verse 13 and he says, therefore the person who speaks in a tongue should pray that he can interpret.
For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.
What then?
I will pray with the spirit, and I will also pray with my understanding.
I will sing praise with the spirit, and I will also sing praise with my understanding.
Otherwise, if you praise with the spirit, how will the outsider say amen?
At your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying.
For you may very well be giving thanks, but the other person is not being built up.
I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
Yet in the church, I would rather speak five words with my understanding in order to teach others also than 10,000 words in a tongue.
So Paul turns it inward here in verses 13 through 15.
He explains that uninterpreted tongues
don't even benefit the speaker fully.
It says, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
And that's critical here.
Because Paul refuses this idea that spirituality requires abandoning understanding.
True spiritual worship engages both the heart and the mind.
The spirit does not override human responsibility.
The speaker remains in control.
The gift remains accountable to the goal of love.
And this dismantles the idea that the spirit made me do it.
Or that there's this lack of control because now Paul brings outsiders into view in verses 16 through 19.
People that are outside the church, unbelievers that might be hearing what's going on and wondering how they might respond.
If an unbeliever hears something that they can't understand, they can't agree, they can't learn, and they can't respond in faith.
And so he says in verse 19, I would rather speak five understandable words to instruct others than 10,000 words in a tongue or language.
And that's no exaggeration, it's Paul's conviction.
Paul experienced grace
that he knew he did not deserve and he wanted to spread it to the entire world over.
It is his missionary work that brought the Corinthians to faith and he's wanting them to think in the same way as they think about those outside of their ranks.
Paul values instruction over intensity, he understanding over spectacle and helpfulness over volume.
Love asks, what will I actually move someone
or what will actually move someone toward God.
And then our last few verses here, we want to jump ahead to verse 23 here.
Paul writes, if therefore the whole church assembles together and all are speaking in tongues, and people who are outsiders or unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your minds?
But if all are prophesying and someone believer or outsider comes in, he is convicted by all and is called to account by all.
The secrets of his heart will be revealed, and as a result, he will fall face down and worship God, proclaiming God is really among you.
What, then brothers and sisters, whenever you come together, each one has a hymn, a teaching, a revelation, a tongue, or an interpretation.
Everything is to be done for building.
So Paul here widens the lens for us further.
He addresses maturity directly in these verses.
He tells them to stop thinking like children, chasing what feels exciting instead of what is beneficial.
Then he describes two outcomes.
Chaotic unintelligible worship causes outsiders to say, you are out of your minds, yet clear intelligible proclamation leads outsiders to conviction, repentance, and worship.
This is one of Paul's strongest evangelistic moments.
Order and clarity don't stifle the spirit.
They create space for transformation.
And finally, Paul ends with verse 26, which is the anchor of this entire chapter.
He says, when you come together, let all things be done for building up, whether you're building up your brother and sister in the faith,
or you're building up someone who has not yet come to faith.
It is a discipling strategy and an evangelistic strategy, which by the way, those two things ought not be separated.
We are to reach the loss beyond these walls and build one another up in our walk with Jesus.
Notice what Paul affirms.
Everyone participates.
Everyone contributes.
Everyone submits their contribution to one purpose.
The question is never did I express myself.
The question is did the body grow stronger because I showed up.
And this verse pulls the whole chapter together.
Again, the spirit works to build up, not to show off.
Not for attention, but transformation.
If Paul's point is that the spirit builds people up rather than drawing attention to ourselves, then the question we all have to ask is not am I gifted
But am I being helpful?
Or am I a gift to others?
And the best place to see what that looks like is not Corinth.
It's Christ.
Because Jesus is the clearest picture of spirit-filled life the world has ever seen.
Jesus could have spoken in riddles all the time.
He could have overwhelmed people with mystery, and he did at times.
He could have flexed divine knowledge at every turn, but he didn't.
When Jesus taught, people said he speaks as one having authority, not because he was confusing, but because he was clear.
He used stories, he used everyday images, and he spoke in ordinary ways that people could grasp.
Jesus never said, how can I sound impressive?
He asked, how can I make the Father known?
That was his goal.
If the Son of God chose clarity over spectacle, then spirit-shaped love will do the same."
So here's a question for us.
Where might I be more concerned with being impressive than being helpful?
Because Jesus didn't communicate the same way to everyone.
With scholars he reasoned, with fishermen he used nets and water, with children he welcomed them, with the hurting he slowed down and cared, and with outsiders he explained
patiently.
That is love at work.
Paul's argument here in 1 Corinthians 14 rests on the same principle that love adapts for the sake of others.
So this week, that might mean to explain instead of assuming someone knows.
It might mean slowing down instead of powering through.
It might mean asking questions instead of making statements.
It might choose
It might mean choosing words that serve rather than words that perform.
Clarity isn't dumbing things down either.
It's loving people enough to meet them where they're at.
And one of Paul's biggest concerns in Corinth is that spiritual gifts were being used to elevate the individual rather than to strengthen the church body and community at large.
But Jesus shows us a different way.
Every miracle pointed away from himself
and toward the glory of God.
Every act of power was an act of service.
Every moment of authority was shaped by humility.
Jesus did not use the spirit to draw a crowd.
He followed the lead of the spirit to restore people.
So a spirit shaped life asks the question, is what I'm doing drawing attention to me or is it quietly building someone else?
Paul repeatedly brings outsiders into the conversation in 1 Corinthians 14.
Why would he do that?
Because love is always aware of who is in the room and who is not.
And Jesus did the same.
Task collectors understood him and followed him.
Sinners felt safe around him, inviting them into their home.
Those on the margins leaned in, they didn't back away from Jesus.
Not because he watered down the truth, but because he communicated it clearly and compassionately.
So this ought to challenge us.
In our conversations at our workplaces, within our families, amongst our church, are we creating clarity that invites people closer to Jesus or confusion that pushes them away?
Five clear words that point to Christ will always matter more than 10,000 words.
that leave people lost.
This isn't just about church gatherings, this is also about everyday discipleship.
It looks like speaking clearly instead of vaguely, listening before responding, explaining expectations rather than assuming them, offering encouragement people can actually act on, and sharing faith simply, not impressively.
Because love doesn't ask, what do I want to express?
Love asks,
What will help you grow?
And that's the heartbeat of Christ.
Paul is not asking the Corinthians or us to stop using our gifts, our talent, our time, our resources, but he's asking us to submit to love.
And love looks like Jesus, clear, humble, helpful, others centered.
So here's the question to carry with us this week.
Where might the Spirit be inviting me to choose clarity as an act of love?
In my relationships, no matter where God has placed me.
This week, choose one conversation where you'll slow down, explain more clearly, and aim to help rather than impress.
Not to show off, not to draw attention to oneself, but to quietly, faithfully build someone else up.
Because the Spirit works to build up.
And when we follow Jesus,
we learn to do the same.
The same Jesus who spoke clearly lived humbly and gave his life for us now invites us to live the same kind of love by his spirit.
One of the things that I love about Matthew's telling of the Christmas story is how understated it is.
There are no angels singing in the sky like in Luke.
No shepherds rushing to a field
No extended dialogue.
Just this quiet, weighty moment where an angel appears to Joseph in a dream and says in essence, here's what's happening, here's what God is doing, and here's what you need to do next.
I love this picture here of Joseph and the angel, it's a classic painting.
It looks like the angel slapped Joseph and knocked him out.
Maybe trying to get his attention
sleeping too deeply.
I got something to say to you anyway.
So Joseph is in a moment here confused.
His life has been flipped upside down.
Nothing about his situation makes any sense.
He's discovered that his betrothed is pregnant and has a pretty lofty claim that this was God orchestrated.
And he tries to make the righteous move and divorce her quietly.
But the angel visits him in a dream.
And God doesn't overwhelm him with mystery.
He doesn't give him riddles when the angel appears.
He doesn't ask him to figure it out on his own.
God speaks very clearly in the story.
And Matthew 1, 23, 21, it says this.
This is, but after he had considered these things,
This move an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream saying, Joseph, son of David, don't be afraid to take Mary as your wife because what has been conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will give birth to a son and you are to name him Jesus because he will save his people from their sins.
That is clarity.
When Joseph's life didn't feel all that clear, God intervened with a very clear message, miraculous indeed, but clear.
It was not clarity for a spectacle.
It was clarity so that Joseph could be obedient.
It was clarity that built up Joseph's faith in God and clarity that moved him forward in trust that he could do as God commanded him to do
even when the situation had previously not made any sense.
As though Joseph responds, not with applause, not with attention, but with quiet faithfulness.
He gets up, he does what the angel says, and he steps into God's plan.
That's the kind of clarity Christmas brought into the world.
God didn't send Jesus to impress humanity.
He sent him to save humanity.
That's the clear message Joseph received.
That's the message that Paul came through faith receiving.
And that's the message that he wants to clearly communicate to the Corinthians so that they can communicate it to others.
He didn't arrive in a way that showed off divine power.
He came in a way that could be understood, received and trusted, which means Christmas itself as a living picture
of Paul's point in 1 Corinthians 14.
The spirit doesn't work to show off.
The spirit works to build up.
God speaks so people can follow.
God acts so that people can trust.
God draws near so people can live differently.
So as we leave today, the question is not, how spiritual do I sound?
Or how impressive is my faith?
The question is, is my life helping others?
take their next step toward Jesus.
Because the same spirit who spoke clearly to Joseph, the same spirit who brought Christ into the world, the same spirit Paul writes about in Corinth, is still at work today in you and I.
Not to confuse, not to compete, not to draw attention to ourselves, but to build people up.
to make Jesus known and to invite a weary world into hope.
That's Christmas and Corinth.
And that's the work of the Spirit among us now.
Because the Spirit works to build up, not to show off.
I hope on your way in this morning you got a communion packet
We take communion each Sunday as a body of believers when we come together because we fulfill the commandment that Jesus gave His earliest disciples to do this in remembrance of me.
Jesus broke bread and He gave it to His disciples on the night He was betrayed and said, take and eat.
This is my body which is given for you.
And then He passed the cup and said, take and drink.
This is my blood which is given for you.
And when we take this act of obedience, this act of clarity of what God has done for us, we proclaim our faith in Him.
We proclaim that we have received the gospel, that we have faithfully responded to it, and that we choose daily to faithfully live it out as a light
and assault to others.
So I invite you to take a moment to contemplate the goodness of God, the clear message of salvation that we've received, and after we take that moment of reflection, we'll take communion together as one church family.
invite each and every one of you to take the bread from this cup and eat.
This is his body, which is given for us.
And likewise, I invite you to take and drink from this cup.
This is his blood, which is poured out for us.
Please pray with me.
Dear Lord God, we thank you that we can hear the words that Paul wrote to the Corinthians who were so impassioned and boldened to try to live faithfully and spiritually but had things of it crossed up at times and we are often in the same spot.
But I thank you for the boldness
of your grace, the wonder of your mercy, the move that you made to send your son Jesus as we celebrated this time of year, his arrival, but even more so that he was obedient to you in giving of his life so that we could have life to the full.
I thank you for that gospel message, and I pray that each and every one of us that are followers of your son Jesus
will aim to live and to love with clarity, not only to one another to build each other up in faith, but to be a light to the world around us.
The people that don't yet have faith haven't yet made that decision.
And if someone in this room is at that point where they're wondering what it looks like to follow Jesus fully
I pray that you will stir in their hearts the decision to be baptized and to follow in his footsteps.
We thank you so much for being good to us and it's in your son Jesus name that we pray.
Amen.